



Network Working Group                                         J. Jimenez
Internet-Draft                                                  Ericsson
Intended status: Informational                             H. Tschofenig
Expires: September 20, 2018                                          ARM
                                                               D. Thaler
                                                               Microsoft
                                                          March 19, 2018


   Report from the Internet of Things (IoT) Semantic Interoperability
                         (IOTSI) Workshop 2016
                      draft-iab-iotsi-workshop-02

Abstract

   This document provides a summary of the 'Workshop on Internet of
   Things (IoT) Semantic Interoperability (IOTSI)', which took place in
   Santa Clara, CA, on March 17-18, 2016.  The main goal of the workshop
   was to foster a discussion on the different approaches used by
   companies and standards developing organizations to accomplish
   interoperability at the application layer.  This report summarizes
   the discussions and lists recommendations to the standards community.
   The views and positions in this report are those of the workshop
   participants and do not necessarily reflect those of the authors and
   the Internet Architecture Board (IAB), which organized the workshop.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 20, 2018.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2018 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.




Jimenez, et al.        Expires September 20, 2018               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          draft-iab-iotsi-workshop              March 2018


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  Architecture  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  What Problems to Solve  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   5.  Translation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   6.  Dealing with change . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   8.  Collaboration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   9.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   10. Appendix A: Program Committee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   11. Appendix B: Accepted Position Papers  . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   12. Appendix C: List of Participants  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   13. Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16

1.  Introduction

   The Internet Architecture Board (IAB) holds occasional workshops
   designed to consider long-term issues and strategies for the
   Internet, and to suggest future directions for the Internet
   architecture.  The investigated topics often require coordinated
   efforts of many organizations and industry bodies to improve an
   identified problem.  One of the targets of the workshops is to
   establish communication between relevant organizations, especially
   when the topics are out of the scope for the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  This long-term planning function of the IAB is
   complementary to the ongoing engineering efforts performed by working
   groups of the IETF.

   With the expansion of the Internet of Things (IoT), interoperability
   becomes more and more important.  Standards-developing organizations
   have done a tremendous amount of work to standardize protocols to
   simplify implementation and to lower the cost of IoT products.  As a
   result, new protocols were developed, existing protocols were
   combined in new ways, and lightweight profiles were defined.




Jimenez, et al.        Expires September 20, 2018               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          draft-iab-iotsi-workshop              March 2018


   At the application layer, interoperability is not yet mature; the
   work on data formats (in the form of data models and information
   models) has not seen the same level of consistency throughout various
   standardization groups.

   One common problem is the lack of an encoding-independent
   standardization of the information, the so-called information model.
   Another problem is the strong relationship with the underlying
   communication architecture, such as an RPC or a RESTful design.
   Furthermore, different groups develop similar concepts that only
   differ slightly, leading to interoperability problems.  Finally, some
   groups favor different encodings for use with various application
   layer protocols.

   Thus, the IAB decided to organize a workshop to reach out to relevant
   stakeholders to explore the state-of-the-art and to identify
   communality and gaps [IOTSIAG], [IOTSIWS].  In particular, the IAB
   was interested to learn about the following aspects:

   o  What is the state of the art in data and information models?  What
      should an information model look like?

   o  What is the role of formal languages, such as schema languages, in
      describing information and data models?

   o  What is the role of metadata, which is attached to data to make it
      self-describing?

   o  How can we achieve interoperability when different organizations,
      companies and individuals develop extensions?

   o  What is the experience with interworking various data models
      developed from different groups, or with data models that evolved
      over time?

   o  What functionality should online repositories for sharing schemas
      have?

   o  How can existing data models be mapped against each other to offer
      interworking?

   o  Is there room for harmonization, or are the use cases of different
      groups and organizations so unique that there is no possibility
      for cooperation?

   o  How can organizations better work together to increase awareness
      and information sharing?




Jimenez, et al.        Expires September 20, 2018               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          draft-iab-iotsi-workshop              March 2018


2.  Terminology

   The first roadblock to semantic interoperability is the lack of a
   common vocabulary to start the discussion.  [RFC3444] provides a
   starting point by separating conceptual models for designers, or
   "information models", from concrete detailed definitions for
   implementers, or "data models".  There are concepts that are
   undefined in that RFC and elsewhere, such as the interaction with the
   resources of an endpoint, or "interaction model".  Therefore the
   three "main" common models that were identified were:

   Information Model
      An information model defines an environment at the highest level
      of abstraction, they express the desired functionality.  They can
      be defined informally (e.g., in plain English) or more formally
      (e.g., UML, Entity-Relationship Diagrams, etc.).  Implementation
      details are hidden.

   Data Model
      A data model defines concrete data representations at a lower
      level of abstraction, including implementation and protocol-
      specific details.  Some examples are: SNMP Management Information
      Base (MIB) modules, W3C Thing Description (TD) Things, YANG
      models, LWM2M Schemas, OCF Schemas and so on.

   Interaction Model
      An interaction model defines how data is accessed and retrieved
      from the endpoints, being therefore tied to the specific
      communication pattern that the system has (e.g., REST methods,
      Publish/Subscribe operations, or RPC calls).

   Another identified terminology issue is the semantic meaning overload
   that some terms have.  The meaning can vary depending on the context
   in which the term is used.  Some examples of such terms are:
   semantics, models, encoding, serialization format, media types or
   encoding types.  Due to time constraints, no concrete terminology was
   agreed upon, but work will continue within each organization to
   create various terminology documents.  The participants agreed to set
   up a github repository [IOTSIGIT] for sharing information.

3.  Architecture

   Various architectures follow different design patterns.  Some are
   REST- oriented with a limited set of standard methods to find and
   manipulate resources on endpoints.  Others are RPC-like, with a rich
   set of methods that may vary by resource type.  Still others are more
   Publish/Subscribe-oriented that focus on the flow of information
   based on the topics of the information that is being shared.



Jimenez, et al.        Expires September 20, 2018               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          draft-iab-iotsi-workshop              March 2018


   TODO: The 3 items below need to be rewritten, perhaps as normal
   paragraphs, as they're hard to follow and it's unclear what the
   purpose of the "list" is.

   Thing-hub-cloud
      Things talk to some type of hub or gateway, which talks back to
      them and to the cloud.  There is a spectrum of emphasis on the hub
      vs. the cloud.  For some, the hub is simply an IP router that
      connects different link layer technologies, but for others it is a
      critical place for maintaining local control.

   Meta Thing
      Some things are actually a composite of other things, like an
      alarm composed of a clock, lights, and thermostat.

   Nearby things
      Some things may be geospatially related even if they are not on
      the same network or within the same administrative domain.

   Current data models and definitions for "things" often focus on
   defining actual physical devices and representing their state.  That
   focus should perhaps be shifted into a more holistic or user-oriented
   perspective, defining abstract concepts as well.  On the other hand,
   a lot of focus is placed on human interaction with physical devices,
   while IoT may often be more focussed on interaction between "things"
   instead.

   Those things should be designed to be multi-purpose, keeping in mind
   that solutions should be open-ended to facilitate new usages and new
   future domains of operation.  This pattern has already happened,
   where devices that were intended for one purpose ended up being used
   for a different one given the right context (e.g., a smart phone LED
   light was used as a heartrate monitor).

4.  What Problems to Solve

   The participants agreed that there is not simply a single problem to
   be solved, but rather a range.  At least the following problems were
   discussed:

   o  Formal Languages for Documentation Purposes

   To simplify review and publication, standardization organizations are
   in need of a more formal description of their information and data
   models.  For example, the Open Mobile Alliance (OMA) used an XML
   schema [LWM2M-Schema] to describe their object definitions (i.e.,
   data model) and the actual object definitions are available for
   download as XML instance documents.  These XML documents offer an



Jimenez, et al.        Expires September 20, 2018               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          draft-iab-iotsi-workshop              March 2018


   alternative way of describing objects compared to the tabular
   representation found in the specification itself.  The XML files of
   standardized objects are available for download at [OMNA].
   Furthermore, a tool is offered to define new objects and resources.
   The online editor tool can be found at [OMA-Editor].

   TODO: It might appear unfair to just call out a single organization
   above, which implies that mechanism is somehow better than the other
   organizations present that have other formal languages, especially
   when the workshop mentioned multiple.  W3C uses RDF, OCF uses
   JSON+RAML, AllSeen uses XML with a specific XSD, etc.  Should either
   use multiple examples, or no examples.

   o  Formal Languages for Code Generation

   Code generation tools that use formal data and information modelling
   languages are needed by developers.  For example, the Allseen Visual
   Studio Plugin [Allseen-Plugin] offers a wizard to generate code based
   on the formal description of the data model.  Another example of a
   data modelling language that can be used for code generation is YANG.
   A popular tool to help with code generation of YANG modules is pyang
   [PYANG].  An example of a tool that can do code generation for
   different ecosystems is OpenDOF [OpenDOF].  Use cases discussed for
   code generation included easing development of server-side device
   functionality, clients, and compliance tests.

   o  Debugging Support

   Debugging tools are needed that implement generic object browsers,
   which use standard data models and/or retrieve formal language
   descriptions from the devices themselves.  As one example, the NRF
   Bluetooth Smart sniffer from Nordic Semiconductor [nRF-Sniffer] can
   be used to display services and characteristics defined by the
   Bluetooth SIG.  As another example, AllJoyn Explorer
   [AllJoynExplorer] can be used to browse and interact with any
   resource exposed by an AllJoyn device, including both standard and
   vendor-defined data models, by retrieving the formal descriptions
   from the device at runtime.

   o  Translation

   Gateways and other similar devices need to dynamically translate (or
   map) one data model to another one.  An example of this idea can be
   found in [UDI].

   TODO: Probably need to list other examples discussed in the workshop
   as well.




Jimenez, et al.        Expires September 20, 2018               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          draft-iab-iotsi-workshop              March 2018


   o  Runtime Discovery

   Allow IoT devices to exchange information, potentially along with the
   data exchange, to discover meta-data about the data and, potentially,
   even a self-describing interaction model.  An example of such an
   approach has been shown with HATEOAS [HATEOAS].

   TODO: Probably need to list other examples discussed in the workshop
   as well.  For example, AllJoyn introspection.

5.  Translation

   In an ideal world where organizations and companies cooperate and
   agree on a single data model standard, there is no need for gateways
   that translate from one data model to the other one.  However, this
   is far from reality today, and there are many proprietary data models
   in addition to the already standardized ones.  There are analogies
   with gateways back in the 1980s that were used to translate between
   network layer protocols.  Eventually IP took over, providing the
   necessary end-to-end interoperability at the network layer.
   Unfortunately, the introduction of translation gateways that lead to
   the loss of expressiveness due to the translation between data models
   seems unavoidable.

   TODO: add discussion of the "red star" diagram

   TODO: add key point discussed that translation between two standard
   data models requires specific code, it cannot be algorithmically
   derived based on the two formal descriptions.  It can only be
   algorithmically done when the actual data model on one side is
   actually algorithmically derived from the one on the other side.
   This is called a "derived model".

   Translation can happen in two flavours, namely:

   a) Translating formal descriptions between data models: a translation
   between data model descriptions, such as translating a YANG model to
   a RAML/JSON model, can be performed once such as during design time.
   A single information model can be mapped to a number of different
   data models.  b) Translating data between data models: this flavour
   implies doing translation at runtime.

   TODO: more info was summarized on the slides and in the notes about
   three types of runtime interactions discussed in the papers (and at
   the workshop):

   In one sense, these distinctions affect when the relevant translation
   is performed.  It can be done at "design time" when the information



Jimenez, et al.        Expires September 20, 2018               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          draft-iab-iotsi-workshop              March 2018


   model is done, or it can be done at runtime for a concrete data model
   and it can be done depending on the actual serialization.

   Yet another distinction will appear depending on the requirements
   from the application protocols.  RPC-style ones might require a
   slightly different data model than RESTful ones for similar
   operations.  For example, SNMP-traps could be similar to CoAP-
   Observations but not quite the same.  It is easier to translate
   between systems that follow the same architecture/design pattern than
   across architectures, and sometimes a full translation might not even
   be possible (e.g., stateless vs stateful systems).

6.  Dealing with change

   A large part of the workshop was dedicated to the evolution of
   devices and server side applications.  Multiple of the participating
   groups have defined data formats for data representation.
   Interactions between devices and services and how their relationship
   evolves over time is more related to their respective interaction
   models.

   The workshop discussed various approaches to dealing with change.  In
   the most primitive case, a developer might use a description of an
   API and implement whichever are the protocol steps.  In some cases
   the information model itself can be used to generate some of the code
   stubs.  Subsequent changes to an API require changes on the clients
   to upgrade to the new version, which requires some development of new
   code to satisfy the needs of the new API.

   These interactions could be made machine-understandable in the first
   place, enabling for changes to happen at runtime.  In that scenario,
   a machine client could discover the possible interactions with a
   service, adapting to changes as they occur without specific code
   being developed to adapt to them.

   The challenge seems to be to define the human-readable parts as
   machine-readable.  Machine-readable languages require a shared
   vocabulary to give meaning to the tags.

   These types of interactions are often based on the REST architectural
   style.  Its principle is that a device or endpoint only needs a
   single entry point with a host providing descriptions of the API in-
   band by means of web links and forms.

   By defining IoT-specific relation types, it is possible to drive
   interactions through links instead of hardcoding URIs into the
   client, thus making the system flexible enough for later changes.
   The definition of the basic hypermedia formats for IoT is still work



Jimenez, et al.        Expires September 20, 2018               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          draft-iab-iotsi-workshop              March 2018


   in progress, however some of the existing mechanisms can be reused,
   such as resource discovery, forms, or links.

7.  Security Considerations

   There were two types of security considerations discussed: use of
   formal data models for security configuration, and security of data
   and data models in general.

   It was observed that the security assumptions and configuration, or
   "security model", varies by ecosystem today, making the job of a
   translator difficult.  For example, the types of security principals
   (e.g., user vs. device vs. application), the use of ACLs vs.
   capabilities, and what types of policies can be expressed, all vary
   by ecosystem.  As a result, the security model architecture generally
   dictates where translation can be done.

   One approach discussed was whether two endpoints might be able to use
   some overlay security model, across a translator between two
   ecosystems, which only works if the two endpoints agree on a common
   data model for their communication.  Another approach discussed was
   simply having a translator act as a trusted intermediary, which
   allows the translator to be able to translate between different data
   models.

   One suggestion discussed was potentially adding metadata into either
   the formal data model language, or accompanying the data values over
   the wire, tagging the data with privacy levels.  However, sometimes
   even the privacy level of information might itself be sensitive.
   Still, it was observed that being able to dynamically learn security
   requirements might help provide better UIs and translators.

8.  Collaboration

   The participants discussed how best to share information among their
   various organizations.  One discussion was around having joint
   meetings.  One current challenge reported was that organizations were
   not aware of when and where each others' meetings were scheduled, and
   sharing such information could help organizations better colocate
   meetings.  To facilitate this exchange, the participants agreed to
   add links to their respective meeting schedules from a common page in
   the IOTSI repository [IOTSIGIT].

   Another challenge reported was that organizations did not know how to
   find each others' published data models, and sharing such information
   could better facilitate reuse of the same information model.  To
   facilitate this exchange, this participants discussed whether a
   common repository might be used by multiple organizations.  The OCF's



Jimenez, et al.        Expires September 20, 2018               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          draft-iab-iotsi-workshop              March 2018


   OneIoTa repository was discussed as one possibility but it was
   reported that its Terms of Use at the time of the workship prevented
   this.  The OCF agreed to take this back and look at updating the
   Terms of Use to allow other organizations to use it too, as the
   restriction was not the intent.  Schema.org was discussed as another
   possibility.  In the meantime, the participants agreed to add links
   to their respective repositories from a common page in the IOTSI
   repository [IOTSIGIT].

   It was also agreed that the iotsi@iab.org mailing list would remain
   open and available for sharing information between all relevant
   organizations.

9.  Acknowledgements

   We would like to thank all paper authors and participants for their
   contributions, and Ericsson for hosting the workshop.

10.  Appendix A: Program Committee

   This workshop was organized by the following individuals: Jari Arkko,
   Ralph Droms, Jaime Jimenez, Michael Koster, Dave Thaler, and Hannes
   Tschofenig.

11.  Appendix B: Accepted Position Papers

   o  Jari Arkko, "Gadgets and Protocols Come and Go, Data Is Forever"

   o  Carsten Bormann, "Noise in specifications hurts"

   o  Benoit Claise, "YANG as the Data Modelling Language in the IoT
      space"

   o  Robert Cragie, "The ZigBee Cluster Library over IP"

   o  Dee Denteneer, Michael Verschoor, Teresa Zotti, "Fairhair:
      interoperable IoT services for major Building Automation and
      Lighting Control ecosystems"

   o  Universal Devices, "Object Oriented Approach to IoT
      Interoperability"

   o  Bryant Eastham, "Interoperability and the OpenDOF Project"

   o  Stephen Farrell, Alissa Cooper, "It's Often True: Security's
      Ignored (IOTSI) - and Privacy too"





Jimenez, et al.        Expires September 20, 2018              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft          draft-iab-iotsi-workshop              March 2018


   o  Christian Groves, Lui Yan, ang Weiwei, "Overview of IoT semantics
      landscape"

   o  Ted Hardie, "Loci of Interoperability for the Internet of Things"

   o  Russ Housley, "Vehicle-to-Vehicle and Vehicle-to-Infrastructure
      Communications"

   o  Jaime Jimenez, Michael Koster, Hannes Tschofenig, "IPSO Smart
      Objects"

   o  David Jones, IOTDB - "Interoperability Through Semantic
      Metastandards"

   o  Sebastian Kaebisch, Darko Anicic, "Thing Description as Enabler of
      Semantic Interoperability on the Web of Things"

   o  Achilleas Kemos, "Alliance for Internet of Things Innovation
      Semantic Interoperability Release 2.0, AIOTI WG03 - IoT
      Standardisation"

   o  Ari Keraenen, Cullen Jennings, "SenML: simple building block for
      IoT semantic interoperability"

   o  Dongmyoung Kim, Yunchul Choi, Yonggeun Hong, "Research on Unified
      Data Model and Framework to Support Interoperability between IoT
      Applications"

   o  Michael Koster, "Model-Based Hypertext Language"

   o  Matthias Kovatsch, Yassin N.  Hassan, Klaus Hartke, "Semantic
      Interoperability Requires self describing Interaction Models"

   o  Kai Kreuzer, "A Pragmatic Approach to Interoperability in the
      Internet of Things"

   o  Barry Leiba, "Position Paper"

   o  Marcello Lioy, "AllJoyn"

   o  Kerry Lynn, Laird Dornin, "Modeling RESTful APIs with JSON Hyper-
      Schema"

   o  Erik Nordmark, "Thoughts on IoT Semantic Interoperability: Scope
      of security issues"

   o  Open Geospatial Consortium, "OGC SensorThings API: Communicating
      "Where" in the Web of Things"



Jimenez, et al.        Expires September 20, 2018              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft          draft-iab-iotsi-workshop              March 2018


   o  Jean Paoli, Taqi Jaffri, "IoT Information Model Interoperability:
      An Open, Crowd-Sourced Approach in Three Parallel Parti"

   o  Joaquin Prado, "OMA Lightweight M2M Resource Model"

   o  Dave Raggett, Soumya Kanti Datta, "Input paper for IAB Semantic
      Interoperability Workshop"

   o  Pete Rai, Stephen Tallamy, "Semantic Overlays Over Immutable Data
      to Facilitate Time and Context Specific Interoperability"

   o  Jasper Roes, Laura Daniele, "Towards semantic interoperability in
      the IoT using the Smart Appliances REFerence ontology (SAREF) and
      its extensions"

   o  Max Senges, "Submission for IAB IoT Sematic Interoperability
      workshop"

   o  Bill Silverajan, Mert Ocak, Jaime Jimenez, "Implementation
      Experiences of Semantic Interoperability for RESTful Gateway
      Management"

   o  Ned Smith, Jeff Sedayao, Claire Vishik, "Key Semantic
      Interoperability Gaps in the Internet-of-Things Meta-Models"

   o  Robert Sparks and Ben Campbell, "Considerations for certain IoT
      based services"

   o  J.  Clarke Stevens, "Open Connectivity Foundation oneIoTa Tool"

   o  J.  Clarke Stevens, Piper Merriam, "Derived Models for
      Interoperability Between IoT Ecosystems"

   o  Ravi Subramaniam, "Semantic Interoperability in Open Connectivity
      Foundation (OCF) - formerly Open Interconnect Consortium (OIC)""

   o  Andrew Sullivan, "Position paper for IOTSI workshop"

   o  Darshak Thakore, "IoT Security in the context of Semantic
      Interoperability"

   o  Dave Thaler, "IoT Bridge Taxonomy"

   o  Dave Thaler, S"ummary of AllSeen Alliance Work Relevant to
      Semantic Interoperability"






Jimenez, et al.        Expires September 20, 2018              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft          draft-iab-iotsi-workshop              March 2018


   o  Mark Underwood, Michael Gruninger, Leo Obrst, Ken Baclawski, Mike
      Bennett, Gary Berg-Cross, Torsten Hahmann, Ram Sriram, "Internet
      of Things: Toward Smart Networked Systems and Societies"

   o  Peter van der Stok, Andy Bierman, "YANG-Based Constrained
      Management Interface (CoMI)"

12.  Appendix C: List of Participants

   o  Andy Bierman, YumaWorks

   o  Carsten Bormann, Uni Bremen/TZI

   o  Ben Campbell, Oracle

   o  Benoit Claise, Cisco

   o  Alissa Cooper, Cisco

   o  Robert Cragie, ARM Limited

   o  Laura Daniele, TNO

   o  Bryant Eastham, OpenDof

   o  Christian Groves, Huawei

   o  Ted Hardie, Google

   o  Yonggeun Hong, ETRI

   o  Russ Housley, Vigil Security

   o  David Janes, IOTDB

   o  Jaime Jimenez, Ericsson

   o  Shailendra Karody, Catalina Labs

   o  Ari Keraenen, Ericsson

   o  Michael Koster, SmartThings

   o  Matthias Kovatsch, Siemens

   o  Kai Kreuzer, Deutsche Telekom

   o  Barry Leiba, Huawei



Jimenez, et al.        Expires September 20, 2018              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft          draft-iab-iotsi-workshop              March 2018


   o  Steve Liang, Uni Calgary

   o  Marcello Lioy, Qualcomm

   o  Kerry Lynn, Verizon

   o  Mayan Mathen, Catalina Labs

   o  Erik Nordmenk, Arista

   o  Jean Paoli, Microsoft

   o  Joaquin Prado, OMA

   o  Dave Raggett, W3C

   o  Max Senges, Google

   o  Ned Smith, Intel

   o  Robert Sparks, Oracle

   o  Ram Sriram, NIST

   o  Clarke Stevens

   o  Ram Subramanian, Intel

   o  Andrew Sullivan, DIN

   o  Darshak Thakore, Cablelabs

   o  Dave Thaler, Microsoft

   o  Hannes Tschofenig, ARM Limited

   o  Michael Verschoor, Philips Lightning

13.  Informative References

   [AllJoynExplorer]
              Microsoft, "AllJoyn Explorer", 2016.

   [Allseen-Plugin]
              Rockwell, B., "Using the AllJoyn Studio Extension", 2016.






Jimenez, et al.        Expires September 20, 2018              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft          draft-iab-iotsi-workshop              March 2018


   [HATEOAS]  Kovatsch, M., "Semantic Interoperability Requires Self-
              describing Interaction Models - HATEOAS for the Internet
              of Things", Proceedings of the IoT Semantic
              Interoperability Workshop 2016, 2016.

   [IOTSIAG]  IAB, "IoT Workshop for Semantic Interoperability (IOTSI) -
              Agenda and Slides", 2016,
              <https://www.iab.org/activities/workshops/iotsi/agenda/>.

   [IOTSIGIT]
              IOTSI, "Github Collaborative Repository", 2016,
              <https://github.com/iotsi/iotsi>.

   [IOTSIWS]  IAB, "IoT Workshop for Semantic Interoperability (IOTSI)
              2016 - Main Page and Position Papers", 2016,
              <https://www.iab.org/activities/workshops/iotsi/>.

   [LWM2M-Schema]
              OMA, "OMA LWM2M XML Schema", 2016.

   [OMA-Editor]
              OMA, "OMA LWM2M Object and Resource Editor", 2016.

   [OMNA]     OMA, "OMNA Lightweight M2M (LWM2M) Object & Resource
              Registry", 2016.

   [OpenDOF]  OpenDOF, "The OpenDOF Project", 2015,
              <https://opendof.org>.

   [PYANG]    Bjorklund, M., "An extensible YANG validator and converter
              in python", 2016.

   [RFC3444]  Pras, A. and J. Schoenwaelder, "On the Difference between
              Information Models and Data Models", RFC 3444, DOI
              10.17487/RFC3444, January 2003, <https://www.rfc-
              editor.org/info/rfc3444>.

   [UDI]      Kohanim, M., "Object Oriented Approach to IoT
              Interoperability", Proceedings of the IoT Workshop for
              Semantic Interoperability (IOTSI), 2016.

   [nRF-Sniffer]
              Nordic Semiconductor, "nRF Sniffer - Smart/Bluetooth low
              energy packet sniffer", 2016.







Jimenez, et al.        Expires September 20, 2018              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft          draft-iab-iotsi-workshop              March 2018


Authors' Addresses

   Jaime Jimenez
   Ericsson

   Email: jaime.jimenez@ericsson.com


   Hannes Tschofenig
   ARM

   Email: hannes.tschofenig@arm.com


   Dave Thaler
   Microsoft

   Email: dthaler@microsoft.com

































Jimenez, et al.        Expires September 20, 2018              [Page 16]
